# Forest cover effect on air temperature in the Brazilian Atlantic Forest and the role of public policies in heat mitigation

Climate change has intensified urban warming, exacerbating heat-related risks in densely populated areas worldwide. This study examines the extent to which forest restoration policies mandated by the Brazilian Forest Code contribute to temperature mitigation and the spatial distribution of cooling benefits across different territorial contexts. Using land-use and land-cover (LULC) and air temperature data, we quantified the cooling potential of forest cover at the landscape scale through causal forest regression models. Results show an average effect ranging from 1.21 to 1.39 °C reduction of air temperature, which is heavily affected by the land cover classes located nearby forested areas, especially urban cover. We also simulated the impact of forest cover expansion over air temperature comparing two land cover scenarios, one representing the Brazilian Forest Code actual scenario of 2020 (60% of compliance), and a hypothetical scenario with the Code’s full compliance—i.e., all Legal Reserves (LRs) and Permanent Preservation Areas (PPAs) declared in the Rural Environmental Registry are fully recovered with native vegetation. Our results indicate that while compliance may result in meaningful temperature reduction (up to 3 °C), mitigating extreme heat cannot depend solely on restoration efforts in rural areas where the Brazilian Forest Code has the greatest impact. We observed that achieving a broader and more equitable distribution of the benefits of climate regulation requires integrated and multi-scalar policies that connect rural and peri-urban restoration to urban green infrastructure planning. We also showed that cooling potential is strongly associated with the size and continuity of forest fragments, which represents a gap in current policies.
